so welcome back to topcast this is part
two of a two-part Series in the first
part which I strongly recommend you
listen to before listening to this one I
discussed it from bit which is not the
name of a paper but rather the name of a
Doctrine developed by John Wheeler which
serves as inspiration for a whole bunch
of different papers one of which is this
one here that I'm going to read by David
Deutsch that first part not only
discusses that Doctrine and the paper
from which it comes but also background
to this paper and where it appears and
why it was written at all in particular
the importance and significance of John
Wheeler as a physicist and as a person
and as someone who contributed across
many many areas of physics not least of
which is general relativity and where I
concluded in the last part his very
expertise in general relativity that
exceeded possibly anyone who's ever
lived might have colored the reason why
he was seemingly insisting upon the fact
that the space-time Continuum was not
fundamental and in fact she needed to
quantize space in a way it came down to
Binary digits of the sort all right so
that's that now we are on to the meat of
the matter the long promised if you
listen to the last episode it's from
Cubit by David Deutsch published in
September 2002 from this book I'm
reading from the PDF that is available
on his website if you want to read along
and so let's just get into it
introduction David Wright's quote of
John Wheeler's really big questions the
one on which most progress has been made
is it from bit does information play a
significant role at the foundation's
physics it is perhaps less ambitious
than some of the other questions such as
how come existence because it does not
necessarily require a metaphysical
answer and unlike say why the quantum it
does not require the discovery of new
laws of nature there was room for hope
that it might be answered through a
better understanding of the laws as we
currently know them particularly of
quantum physics and this is what has
happened the better understanding is the
quantum theory of information and
computation end quote so yes this it
from bit question you know the the
question about whether or not the
fundamental nature of physical reality
consists of information or let's say
particles or material stuff or
space-time continuums that kind of thing
at least that's answerable within the
conception of physics as we understand
it we just have to come to a better
understanding of what it is we already
know okay that's a less ambitious
project than trying to figure out why
does existence exist or why is the world
Quantum full stop okay that kind of
thing that would need new physics in the
second case why the quantum and now why
is there any existence well then you've
got a metaphysical question on your
hands David goes on to say quote how
might our conception of the quantum
physical world have been different if
it's from bit had been a motivation from
the outset no one knows how to derive it
the nature of the physical world from
bit the idea that information plays a
significant role the foundations of
physics and I shall argue that this will
never be possible but we can do the next
best thing we can start from the qubits
wonderful
and next section David writes titled
qubits quote to a classical information
theorist a bit is an abstraction a
certain amount of information to a
programmer a bit is a Boolean variable
to an engineer a bit is a flip-flop a
piece of Hardware that is stable in
either of two physical States and to a
physicist
Quantum information Theory differs in
many ways from its classical predecessor
one reason is that quantum theory
provides a new answer to the ancient
dispute dating back to the stoics and
epicureans and even earlier about
whether the world is discrete or
continuous logic is discrete it forbids
any middle between true and false yet in
classical physics discrete information
process is a derivative and rather
awkward concept pausing there my
reflection David says there logic is
discreet it forbids any middle between
true and false but of course David is
irritatingly rational and reasonable
isn't he
if only he would Embrace a more
open-minded view of the law of the
excluded middle and the law of the
excluded middle is this idea that David
is stating there in logic things are
true or false
you're either in the room right now or
you're not okay I'm either here
delivering this podcast to you now or
I'm not I'm not both doing that forget
the Multiverse we're just talking about
this universe in this universe now
either you are watching me now or you're
not and the fact that you're hearing
this means that you are there's no
middling there's no part way in between
true and false things are true or they
are false full stop end of story yes
there has been some attempt to try and
make Alternatives Logics but those
Logics allow for contradictions unreason
irrationality in the literal sense of
all of those words Things become
illogical the foundational most
important law of logic upon which you
want to develop an understanding of the
world needs to rest upon either the
thing that you're saying has some truth
to it is true or it is strictly speaking
false in some way okay so the
possibility of ruling things out rests
upon this notion that there is no middle
between true and false okay let's get
going David writes quote the fundamental
classical observables vary continuously
with time and if they are Fields with
space too and they obey differential
equations when classical physicists
spoke of discrete observable quantities
such as how many moons a planet had they
were referring to an idealization for in
reality there would have been a
Continuum of possible states of Affairs
between a particular Moon's being in
orbit around the planet and just passing
by each designated by a different real
number or numbers any two such sets of
real numbers however close would refer
to physically different states which
would evolve differently over time and
have different physical effects indeed
the differences between them would
typically grow exponentially with time
because of the instability of classical
Dynamics known as chaos thus since even
one real variable is equivalent to an
Infinity of end independent discrete
variables say the infinite sequence of
zeros and ones in its binary expansion
an infinite amount of in principle
observable information will be present
in any classical object
end quote pausing the Mi reflection
so there's a whole bunch of things to
say there firstly if the world was
classical then you could never specify
things precisely you would always need
an infinite decimal expansion in order
to represent the physical quantities
because different physical States would
require this infinite Precision
there would be at a place which you
couldn't specify exactly you would need
an infinite amount of in principle
observable information there encoded
somehow in real space time if the world
was classical and this also leads to the
idea of chaos discussed in the fabric of
reality chapter 9 quantum computers and
in my episodes on those chapters there
this chaos or butterfly effect about the
fact that ever so slight differences in
classical systems
between the initial conditions are going
to amplify over time to cause radically
different outcomes as time goes on which
just become Amplified the the
differences between them would typically
grow exponentially with time as David
says right there but reality is not
classical reality is quantum and so
there is a finite a finite amount of
information in any
bit of space-time and it is determined
by Planck's constant among other things
that you have these discrete steps
between one physical observable and
another yeah it's not a Continuum
between them as discrete amounts okay so
let's go on to the next section David
mentions here in this next section to
kind of steal some of his Thunder
Zeno's Paradox so it's going to
introduce the idea about how it is that
we get from one particular place to
another in a world that is governed by
the discrete
in one sense
as far as quantum theory is concerned we
can't say that the world is discrete
although the world is continuous it's
both now how can that be possible well
because you always only ever find
yourself in a particular Universe where
you're observing you know the the
electron orbiting the nucleus at one
energy level or you're you're finding
yourself in a universe where you find
the electron orbiting at a different
energy level but never the intermediate
State and so this raises the question of
how it is that in universes where
electrons only have the possibility of
being in one of those two states how it
gets from the Lower State let's say to
the higher energy State well because in
the Multiverse the proportion of
universes where the electron is in let's
say the ground state the lowest possible
energy state has a certain proportion
but will change continuously okay so the
Multiverse the proportion of universes
changes continuously until all of the
universes are universes where the
electron has the higher energy level as
the higher energy State and that's how
the transition occurs even though for
any one Universe it's in one or the
other state discrete
the Multiverse itself has this capacity
to continuously change
and so this is how we reconcile The
Continuous and the discrete in our
present best understanding of physical
reality this too is explained in chapter
9 of the fabric of reality but let's go
to what David says here talking about
you know the Continuum real numbers
um non-discreet stuff
David says quote despite this
ontological extravagance the Continuum
is a very natural idea but then so is
the idea which is the essence of
information processing and therefore of
it from bit that complicated processes
can be analyzed as combinations of
simple ones
these two ideas have not been easy to
reconcile with the benefit of hindsight
I think that this is what xeno's Paradox
of the impossibility of motion was
really about had he been familiar with
classical physics and the concept of
information process he might have put it
something like this
consider the flight of an arrow as
described in classical physics to
understand what happens during the
flight we could try to regard the real
valued position coordinates of the arrow
as pieces of information and the flight
as a computation process that processes
that information and we could try to
analyze that computation as a sequence
of Elementary computations but in that
case what is the elementary operation in
question if we regard the flight AS
consisting of a finite number of shorter
flights then each of them is by any
straightforward measure exactly as
complicated as the whole it comprises
exactly as many sub steps and the
positions that the arrow takes during it
are in one-to-one correspondence with
those of the whole flight yet if
alternatively we regard the flight AS
consisting of a literally infinite
number of infinitesimal steps what
exactly is the effect of such a step
since there is no such thing as a real
number infinitesimally greater than
another we cannot characterize the
effect of this infinitesimal operation
as the transformation of one real number
into another and so we cannot
characterize it as an elementary
computation performed on what we are
trying to regard as information causing
the MRI reflection yes so
that's that's the computational way of
putting this classic xenos Paradox and
two ways there one is to say that well
the arrow is moving an infinitesimal
amount each time but if it's moving an
infinitesimal amount each time then
there's an infinite number of such
infinitesimal amounts for it to move so
if I want to you know reach out and
touch the microphone here I have to go
half the distance half a distance again
half a distance again half the distance
again and I never actually get there
because each of those half distances
requires some finite amount of time it
would be an infinite amount of small but
finite amounts of time that's an
infinite amount of time on the other
hand you could regard that the distance
between here and there here in the
microphone is made up of a finite number
of smaller numbers of intervals but each
of those finite intervals is themselves
made of what more finite intervals on ad
infant item so we've still got a problem
there okay the resolution is that we're
confusing the abstract mathematics of
the situation with what goes on in
physical reality that's the resolution
confusing what is an infinite number of
points in abstract space and how to add
those up with what can actually occur in
physics and what occurs in physics is of
course I can touch anything that I like
I'm not bound by xeno's paradox xenos
paradox is a problem for pure
mathematics and even then you know you
have the the capacity that's called a
limit right you the capacity to add up a
an infinite number of things and get a
finite number so that's one way of
dealing with it and the way in physics
to deal with that's one one answer one
solution to it and the other is that
well physics simply allows you to
Traverse space in a finite amount of
time so that's just that just is what's
going on and so therefore we have to
accept that the laws of physics permit
that to occur and they do permit it to
occur anyone who says that's not
permitted because of Zeno's Paradox is
refuted immediately by experiment
observation by showing them that you can
do such David goes on to say quote for
this sort of reason it from bit would be
a non-starter In classical physics it is
noteworthy that the black body problem
which drove Max Planck unwillingly to
formulate the first quantum theory was
also a consequence of the infinite
information carrying capacity of the
classical Continuum in quantum theory it
is continuous observables that do not
fit naturally into the formalism hence
the name quantum theory and that raises
another Paradox in a sense the converse
of xenos if the spectrum of an
observable quantity the set of possible
outcomes of measuring it is not a
continuous range but a discrete set of
values
how does the system ever make the
transition from one of those values to
another
the remarkable ants are given by quantum
theory is that it makes it continuously
it can do that because a Quantum
observable the basic descriptor of
quantum reality is neither a real
variable like a classical degree of
Freedom nor a discrete variable like a
classical bit but a more complicated
object that has both continuous and
discrete aspects pausing there my
reflection this is
my interpretation could be wrong no
interpretation is this is what a cubit
is right qubit can take on
the zero or the one there's your
discrete but also it can transition
continuously between them and you know
you're using the block sphere it can
take on the values in between those
things but we have those discrete values
and the Continuum of transitions between
them
now we begin to get a little technical
by the way so I'll read this I'll put
this up on the screen and we'll read
this paragraph together when
investigating the foundations of quantum
theory and especially the role of
information it is best to use the
Heisenberg picture in which Quantum
observables which I shall Mark with a
carrot as in X hat T change with time
and the quantum state of PSI is constant
though the Schrodinger picture is
equivalent for all predictive purposes
and more efficient for most calculations
it is very bad at representing
information flow and is given rise to
widespread misconceptions see Deutsche
and Hayden and quite pausing there okay
I'm not going to linger over Deutsche
and Hayden now that could take some
distant future episode of Top cast to
consider observables not represented as
single numbers that the thing about this
Schrodinger picture two ways of looking
at
quantum theory the Schrodinger picture
which is the wave function idea and the
Heisenberg picture where observables are
not represented as single numbers
they're represented as matrices or
better yet the matrices are themselves
the numbers numbers being represented by
matrices okay they're the observables
represented as matrices it's all rather
Technical and approaching the very
limits of my pay grade so to speak so I
can't go into that right now let's
continue David Wright's quotes apart
from the trivial observables there are
multiples of the unit observable one hat
and hence only have one eigenvalue the
simplest type of quantum observable is a
Boolean observable defined as one with
exactly two eigenvalues this is the
closest thing that quantum physics has
to the programmer's ID of a Boolean
variable but the engineers flip flop is
not just an observable
it is a whole physical system
the simplest Quantum system that
contains a Boolean observable is a qubit
equivalently A qubit can be defined as
any system all of whose non-trivial
observables are Boolean just pausing in
my reflection what I want to emphasize
here because it's going to come into the
conclusion and it's important to keep in
mind right now the observables the
engineers flip flop the binary digit
what a Boolean variable
is a whole physical system
the simplest Quantum system that
contains the Boolean observable is a
qubit cubits are physical things they're
physical things it's important to keep
that in mind okay the Boolean
observable Boolean variable rather it's
a whole physical system the simplest
Quantum system that contains such a
Boolean observable okay a true false a
one zero is a qubit
the physical system
let's get going David says quote
qubits are also known as Quantum
two-state systems although this is
rather misleading because like all
Quantum systems a qubit has a Continuum
of physical States available to it
the spin of a spin half particle such as
an electron is an example the fact that
a qubit is a type of physical system
rather than a pure abstraction is
another important conceptual difference
between the classical and quantum
theories of information
let me repeat that let me repeat that
and you might wonder why I'm emphasizing
this but it will become glaringly
obvious towards the end
if you cannot already foresee why the
fact that a qubit is a type of physical
system rather than a pure abstraction is
another important conceptual difference
between the classical and quantum
theories of information end quote if you
think the world is all information
these ideas that have read up over the
years over the decades over the
centuries Millennia perhaps some form of
idealism where you have information as
the base reality
what David's saying here is the most
fundamental theory of information is
quantum there's quantum theory of
information the base unit of which is
the qubit the nature of which is
physical it's a physical thing it's not
purely in the abstract it's not out
there and
platonic ideal reality it's here in
physical reality important to know now
I'm skipping the next few paragraphs a
couple of paragraphs because they are
technical picking it up where David
Wright's quote the classical information
storage capacity of a qubit is exactly
one bit
but there is no Elementary entity in
nature corresponding to a bit
it is qubits that occur in nature bits
Boolean variables and classical
computation are all emergent or
approximate properties of qubits
manifested mainly when they undergo the
coherence just pausing Mr reflection
brilliant again just to re-emphasize the
qubits are physical things they're not
abstract ideals they're physical things
skipping a little David goes on to say
quote in physical implementations qubits
are always subsystems of other Quantum
systems such as photons or electrons
which are themselves manipulated via a
larger apparatus in order to give the
quantum computational network its
defining properties however one of those
properties is that the network is
causally autonomous that is to say the
law of motion of each qubit depends only
on its own observables and those of
other qubits of the network and the
motion of the external apparatus is
independent of that of the qubits hence
all the external paraphernalia can be
abstracted away when we study the
properties of quantum computational
networks so just my reflection on that
in physical implementations qubits are
always photons electrons or something
else okay they're they're made of
physical things a qubit isn't just let's
think of it in the abstract it's out
there in the platonic realm I know I'm
emphasizing this for like the fourth
time now but they have to be made of
something and in real life experimental
you know nascent quantum computers as
people are trying to build right now
they're ions or their photons or their
electrons there's some sort of matter
some sort of material important to keep
in mind okay for the philosophy of this
for the metaphysics of this if you like
that's important to understand to
appreciate okay to the well the modern
instantiation of this is Donald Hoffman
all right you know people who want to
have these Grand ultimate theories of
reality that say that stuff comes down
to information
but ignore this ignore our deepest
theory of reality our deepest theory of
reality is quantum computation for the
reasons I said earlier okay we've got
these unification of computation and
quantum theory so this this is the
deepest qubits are the fundamental
nature of reality but they're physical
and they need to be represented using
some bit of matter or other or particle
anyway Photon now I'm skipping again
quite a bit here and I'm picking it up
where David says quote it might seem
that the study of quantum computational
networks is a narrow subspecies of
physics qubits are special physical
systems and are often realized as
subsystems of what are normally
considered Elementary systems such as
Elementary particles in Quantum Gates
qubits interact in a rather unusual way
they strongly affect each other while
remaining isolated from the environment
their periods of interaction are
synchronized alternating with periods of
inertness and so on we even assume that
all the qubits of the network start out
with their spins pointing in let's say
the plus Z direction or whatever the
initial condition means for qubits that
are not spin minus a half systems none
of these attributes is common in nature
and none can never be realized perfectly
in the laboratory at the present state
of Technology realizing them well enough
to perform any useful computation is
still a tremendously challenging
unattained Target yet Quantum
computational networks have another
property which makes them far more
worthy of both scientific and
philosophical study then this way of
describing them might suggest the
property is computational universality
universality has several interrelated
aspects including the fact that a single
standard type of quantum gate suffices
to build Quantum computational networks
with arbitrary functionality
the fact that Quantum computational
networks are a universal model for
computation the fact that a universal
quantum computer can simulate with
arbitrary accuracy the behavior of
arbitrary physical systems the fact not
yet verified that such computers can be
constructed in practice
end quote
um David has mentioned a couple of times
now this concept of gates uh Quantum
Gates or logic gates more broadly
speaking these are the physical things
that allow for computation to occur in
electronics traditionally in electronics
you have and the gates you have all
Gates you have not Gates you know these
are logical operations that the
universal gate is the not and gate or
there's a few Universal ways of putting
together Gates such that you don't need
any other Gates but the not and gate not
and that can be used to do anything that
you like classically speaking it's a
universal game and so David's going to
talk about Universal gates in fact in
the very next line so he goes on to say
quote the first of those concerns
Universal Gates one of the ways in which
the theory of quantum computation lives
up to the it from bit intuition is that
in the most natural sense the
computation performed by the component
Gates of a network can indeed be simpler
than that performed by the network as a
whole the POS motions of one or two
qubits through a gate though continuous
are not isomorphic to the possible
motions of a larger network but by
composing multiple instances of only a
single type of gate that performs a
fixed Elementary operation it is
possible to construct networks
performing arbitrary Quantum
computations any gate with this property
is known as a universal Quantum gate it
turns out that not only do there exist
Universal Gates operating on only two
qubits but in the manifold of all
possible two qubit gates only a set of
measure zero are not Universal thus
computational universality is a generic
property of the simplest type of gate
which itself involves interactions
between just two instances of the
simplest type of quantum system there
are also other ways of expressing gate
universality for instance the set of all
single qubit Gates together with the
controlled not operation measurement of
one qubit by another also suffice to
perform arbitrary computations
alternatively so do single cubic Gates
together with the uniquely Quantum
operation of teleportation
all this constitutes a strikingly close
connection between Quantum computation
and quantum physics of which there were
only hints in classical computation and
classical physics models of classical
computation based on idealized classical
systems such as billiard balls have been
constructed in theory but they are
unrealistic in several ways and unstable
because of chaos and no approximation to
such a model could ever be a practical
computer constructing a universal
classical computer such as babbage's
analytical engine from elementary
components that are well described in a
classical approximation such as cogs and
levers requires those components to be
highly composite Precision engineered
objects which would fail in their
function if they had an even slightly
different shape the same is true of the
individual transistors on the microchips
that are used to build today's computers
classical computers but it is not true
for instance of the ions in an ion trap
one of the many Quantum systems that are
currently being investigated for
possible use as quantum computers in an
ion trap a group of ions is held in
place in a straight line by an
ingeniously shaped oscillating electric
field in each ion one electron forms a
two-state system the states being its
ground state and one of its excited
states which constitutes a qubit the
ions interact with each other via a
combination of the coulomb force and an
external electromagnetic field in the
form of laser light which is capable of
causing the observables of any pair of
the qubits to change continuously when
the laser is on the engineering problem
ends there
once an arrangement of that General
description is realized the specific
form of the interaction does not matter
because of the generic universality of
quantum gains there is bound to exist
some sequence of laser pulses each pulse
constituting a gate affecting two of the
qubits that will cause an anion trap to
perform any desired n qubit Quantum
computation pausing the MRI reflection
yes so if you have these ions the more
you have the more qubits you have you
can have to the University of New South
Wales uses precisely this technique
then there's no limit to the size of the
quantum computer you can have you just
keep on having more ions participate in
this kind of computation problem is the
more ions you have the more likely the
thing is to decode here to allow
the information that is in the quantum
computer to leak to the outside world
and then you lose the capacity to
compute they can certainly do the two
qubit case okay that's been demonstrated
maybe that maybe they're up to four now
or something like that but
yeah it did it has to it uses very low
temperatures go to my Multiverse series
on that they need to use not merely
liquid helium but isotopes of helium in
order to evaporative cool the whole
system to stop it from Deco hearing
vibrating
it's an engineering nightmare so far but
you know progress is happening David
goes on to say quote the same sort of
thing applies in all the other physical
systems nuclear spins superconducting
Loops trapped electrons and many more
exotic possibilities that serve or might
one day serve as the elementary
components of quantum computers
Lloyd 1995 has summed this up in the
aphorism quote almost any physical
system becomes a quantum computer if you
shine the right sort of light on it end
quote there is no classical analog of
this aphorism quantum computers are far
harder to engineer than classical
computers of course but not for the same
reason indeed the problem is almost the
opposite it is not to engineer precisely
defined composite systems for useless
components but rather to isolate the
physically simplest systems that already
exist in nature from the complex systems
in their environment that done we have
to find a way of allowing arbitrary
pairs of them to interact in some way
with each other but once that is
achieved in a given type of physical
system no shaping or Machining is
necessary because the interactions that
Quantum systems undergo as a matter of
course are already computationally
Universal the second aspect of
universality is that Quantum networks
are a universal model for Quantum
computation that is to say I consider
any technology that could one day be
used to perform computations whether
Quantum or classical and whether based
on Gates or anything else for any
computer C built using that technology
there exists a quantum computational
network composed entirely of simple
Gates such as instances of a single two
qubit Universal gate that has at least
the same repertoire of computations as C
here we mean the same repertoire in
quite a strong sense namely given a
computational task say factorization and
an input say an integer the network
could produce the same output as C does
say the factors of the integer end quote
now I'm skipping a few paragraphs here
that are Technical and picking it up
where David says quote the upshot is
that the abstract study of quantum
computations as distinct from the study
of how to implement them technologically
is effectively the same as the study of
one particular class of quantum
computational networks which need to
only contain one one type of universal
Quantum gate this universality is the
Quantum generalization of that which
exists in classical computation where
the study of all computations is
effectively the same as the study of any
one universal model such as logic
networks built of nand Gates or tofoli
Gates or the universal turing machine
however Quantum universality has a
further aspect which was only guessed at
and turned out to be lacking in the case
of classical computation Quantum
computational networks can simulate with
arbitrary accuracy the behavior of
arbitrary physical systems and they can
do so using resources that are at most
polynomial in the complexity of the
system being simulated the most General
way of describing Quantum systems of
which we are at all confident is as
Quantum Fields end quote and once more
I'm skipping a sizable amount more
picking it up where David says quote in
most practical computations we should
only be interested in the output for a
given input and North unless we are the
programmer in how it was brought about
but there are exceptions an amusing
example is given in the science fiction
novel permutation City by Greg Egan in
it technology has reached the point
where the computational states of human
brains can be uploaded into a computer
in simulations of those brains starting
from those States interact there with
each other and with a virtual reality
environment a self-contained world of
the client's choice
because these computations are expensive
the people who run the service are
continually seeking ways to optimize the
program that performs this simulation
they've run an optimization algorithm
which systematically examines the
program replacing pieces of code or data
with other pieces that achieve the
identical effect in fewer steps the
simulated people cannot of course
perceive the effect of such
optimizations and yet eventually the
optimization program halts having
deleted the entire simulation with all
its data and reports this program
generates no output by the way there is
no reason to believe that a universal
quantum computer would be required for
such simulations see tegmark 2000 there
is every reason to believe that the
brain is a universal classical computer
nevertheless this strong form of
universality of quantum computation
assures us that such a technology and
artificial intelligence in general must
be possible and tractable regardless of
how the brain works provided that is
that Universal quantum computers can be
built in practice
this is yet another aspect of
universality perhaps the most
significant for the it from qubit's
question indeed universality itself may
not be considered quite as significant
by many physicists and philosophers if
it turns out that qubits cannot in
reality be composed into networks with
universal simulating capabilities okay
now I'm just pausing because we're
reaching the end here and we're reaching
the Pinnacle the conclusion the main
point of the physical and what I might
say ontological or metaphysical
consequences of this view of
Quantum computation being the
fundamental theory of physical reality
and the qubit being the fundamental unit
of that theory of physical information
what David says here he goes on to say
and this section is titled
quote the world is not made of
information okay he goes onto that quote
let us suppose that universality does
hold in all four of the above sensors
then since every physical system can be
fully described as a collection of
qubits it is natural to wonder whether
this can be taken further might it have
been possible to start with such qubit
fields and to interpret traditional
Quantum Fields as emergent properties of
them the fact that all Quantum systems
that are known to occur in nature obey
equations that look fairly simple in
terms of the language of fields on
space-time is perhaps evidence against
such naive qubits are fundamental view
of reality pausing Mi reflection why
would that be ever if you have
the idea that all Quantum systems occur
that occur in nature obey equations that
uh fields on space-time why would that
mean qubits are not fundamental or the
the the evidence against the qubits are
fundamental view of reality well because
that would mean that the fields and
space-time are fundamental they're
deeper they're more important than the
qubits right that that's why you would
avoid qubits are fundamental as being a
conclusion if they are just you know in
the language of fields on space-time all
right push on David says quote on the
other hand we have some evidence in its
favor too one of the few things that we
think we know about the quantum theory
of gravity is expressed in the so-called
beckenstein bound the entropy of any
region of space cannot exceed a fixed
constant times the surface area of the
region beckenstein 1981. this strongly
suggests that the complete State space
of any spatially finite Quantum system
is finite so that in fact it would
contain only a finite number of
independent qubits but even if this most
optimistic Quantum computation centered
view of physics turned out to be true it
would not support the most ambitious
ideas that have been suggested about the
role that information might play out the
foundation of physics the most
straightforward such idea and also the
most extreme is that the whole of what
we usually think of as reality is merely
a program running on a gigantic computer
a great simulator on the face of it this
might seem a promising approach to
explaining the connections between
physics and computation perhaps the
reason why the laws of physics are
expressible in terms of computer
programs is that they are in fact
computer programs perhaps the existence
of computers in nature is a special case
of the ability of computers in this case
the great simulator to emulate other
computers the locality of the laws of
physics is natural because complex
computations are composed of Elementary
computations perhaps the great simulator
is a Quantum cellular automaton and so
on but in fact this whole line of
speculation is a chimera end quote
pausing there yes if the entire universe
is some great simulator then you want to
ask that if it's giving rise to what we
perceive as the laws of physics
where is this simulator and what laws of
physics does it obey
because it's clearly in a larger reality
it sits in that larger reality and it
gives rise to our reality what we
perceive as reality but there's
something beyond our reality in which
the great simulator finds itself obeying
different physical laws
it doesn't help if you're interested in
deep explanations of the world let's get
going David says quote it entails in
other words the the great simulator idea
it entails giving up on explanation in
science
it is in the very nature of
computational universality that if we
and our world were composed of software
we should have no means of understanding
the real physics the physics underlying
the hardware of the great simulator
itself
of course no one can prove that we are
not software like all conspiracy
theories this one is untestable
but if we are to adopt the methodology
of believing such theories we may as
well save ourselves the trouble of all
that algebra and all those experiments
and go back to explaining the world in
terms of the sex lives of Greek gods and
apparently very different way of putting
computation at the heart of physics is
to postulate that all possible laws of
physics in some sense are realized in
nature and then to try to explain the
ones we see entirely as a selection
effect for example Lee small in 1997.
but selection Effects by their very
nature can never be the whole
explanation for the apparent
regularities in the world that is
because making predictions about an
ensemble of Worlds say with different
laws of physics or different initial
conditions depends on the existence of a
measure on The Ensemble making it
meaningful to say things like admittedly
most of them do not have property X but
most of the ones in which anyone exists
who ask the question do but there can be
no up priori measure over all possible
laws tegma 1997 and others have proposed
the complexity of the law when it is
expressed as a computer program might be
this elusive measure but that merely
raises the question complexity According
to which theory of computation classical
and Quantum computation for instance
have very different complexity theories
indeed the very notion of complexity is
irretrievably rooted in physics so in
this sense physics is necessarily prior
to any concept of computation it cannot
possibly come from bits or from qubit by
this route see also my criticism of
Wheeler's Law Without law idea Deutsch
996 pausing the Mi reflection yes but
not right now okay we will persevere
through to just the last bit here David
goes on to say both these approaches
fail because they attempt to reverse the
direction of the explanations that the
real connections between physics and
computation provide they seem plausible
only because they rely on a common
misconception about the status of
computation within mathematics the
misconception is that the set of
computable functions or the set of
quantum computational tasks has some up
priori privileged status within
mathematics but it does not the only
thing that privileges that set of
operations is that it is instantiated in
the computationally universal laws or
physics it is only through our knowledge
of physics that we know of the
distinction between computable and
non-computable or between simple and
complex and the next section is titled
the world is made of qubits and David
says quote so what does that leave us
with not something for nothing
information does not create the world
xnilia nor a world whose laws are really
just fiction so that physics is just a
form of literary criticism but a world
in which the stuff we call information
and the processes we call computations
really do have a special status the
world contains or at least is ready to
contain Universal computers this idea is
Illuminating in a way that it's mirror
image that a universal computer contains
the world never could be the world is
made of qubits every answer to a
question about whether something that
could be observed in nature is so or not
is in reality a bully and observable
each Boolean observable is part of an
entity the qubit that is fundamental to
physical reality but very alien to our
everyday experience it is the simplest
possible Quantum system and yet like all
Quantum systems it is literally not of
this universe part of the Multiverse if
we prepare it carefully so that one of
its Boolean observables are sharp it has
the same value in all the universes in
which we prepare it then according to
the uncertainty principle it's other
Boolean observables cease to be sharp
there is no way we can make the qubit as
a whole homogeneous across the universes
qubits unequivocally multiversal objects
This Is How They are able to undergo
continuous changes even though the
outcome of measuring or being them is
only ever one of a discrete set of
possibilities what we perceive to some
degree of approximation as as a world of
single valued variables is actually part
of a larger reality in which the full
answer to a yes no question is never
just yes or no nor even both yes and no
in parallel but a Quantum observable
something that can be represented as a
large hermitian Matrix is it really
possible to conceive of the world
including ourselves as being made of
matrices in the sense Xeno is in effect
asking the same question about real
numbers in classical physics how can we
be made of real numbers to answer that
question we have to do a Xena did and
analyze the flow of information the
information processing that would occur
if this conception of reality were true
whether we could be made of matrices
comes down to this what sort of
experiences would an observer composed
entirely of matrices living in a world
of matrices have the theories of D
coherence and consistent histories have
answered this question in some detail at
a course grained level the world looks
as though classical physics is true and
as though the classical theories of
information and computation were true
too but where coherent Quantum processes
are underway particularly Quantum
computations there is no such appearance
and an exponentially richer structure
comes into play as Carl Poppin noted the
outcome of solving a problem is never
just a new Theory but always a new
problem as well in fundamental science
this means paradoxically that new
discoveries are always disappointing for
those who hope for a final answer
but it also means that they are doubly
exhilarating for those who seek Evermore
and ever deeper knowledge the argument
that I used above to rule out great
simulator type explanations has
implications for genuine physics too
although in one sense the quantum theory
of computation contains the whole of
physics with the possible exception of
quantum gravity the very power of the
principle of the universality of
computation inherently limits the theory
scope universality means that
computations and the laws of computation
are independent of the underlying
hardware and therefore the quantum
theory of computation cannot explain
Hardware it cannot by itself explain why
some things are technologically possible
and others are not for example steam
engines are perpetual motion machines
are not and yet the quantum theory of
computation knows nothing of the second
law of Thermodynamics if a physical
process can be simulated by a universal
quantum computer then so can its time
reverse an example closer to home is
that of quantum computers themselves the
last aspect of universality that I
mentioned above that Universal quantum
computers can be built in practice has
not yet been verified indeed there are
physicists who doubt that it is true
that the present state of physics this
controversy which is a very fundamental
one from the it from qubit point of view
cannot be addressed from first
principles but if there is any truth in
the it's from Cubit conception of
physics that I have sketched here then
the quantum theory of computation as we
know it must be a special case of a
wider Theory Quantum Constructor Theory
Deutsche 2002 is the theory that
predicts which objects can or cannot be
constructed and using what resources it
is currently in its infancy we have only
fragmentory knowledge of this type such
as the laws of thermodynamics which can
be interpreted as saying that certain
types of machine perpetual motion
machines are the first and second kind
cannot be constructed While others heat
engines with efficiencies approaching
that of the Kano cycle arbitrarily
closely can one day can Quantum
Constructor Theory will likewise embody
principles of nature which express the
fact that certain types of information
processing say the computation of
non-juring computable functions of
integers cannot be realized in any
technology While others the construction
of universal quantum computers with
arbitrary accuracy can
just as the quantum theory of
computation is now the theory of
computation the previous theory
developed by Turing and others being
merely a limiting case so the present
theory of computation will one day be
understood as a special case of quantum
Constructor Theory valid in the limit
where we ignore all issues of Hardware
practicality as Einstein in 1920 said
quote there could be no fairer Destiny
for any physical Theory than that it
should point the way to a more
comprehensive theory in which it lives
on as a limiting case end quote an end
of the paper there the chapter of the
book about science and Ultimate Reality
thereby David Deutsch this paper it from
cubit
so
what we know now is that the most
fundamental theory of reality is quantum
computation and the basic unit is the
qubit of which any number of particles
you know ions perhaps but also things
more like more fundamental like photons
and electrons can serve as instances of
those qubits reality is that base
reality if you like as far as we know it
the observables of these fundamental
particles and you can call those qubits
and here's the kicker as I as I
emphasized throughout my discussion of
this qubits are physical
qubits are physical if reality as deeply
as we know it is information in some
sense but the basic unit of information
is the qubit and qubits are physical
then reality as we know it is physical
basic fundamental reality is physical
idealists everywhere who want base
reality to be informational argue that
it is
informational ideas have to accept those
things reduce to the most basic building
blocks of information or ideas
qubits and qubits are physical
that's what we know reality consists of
fundamentally as far as we understand
fundamental reality now
but as David says towards the end there
our search is not over it never is
because this is simply a limiting case
of whatever the next theory is
perhaps construct a theory Quantum
constructive theory that will be deeper
and that will tell us more than anything
about what these theories general
relativity quantum theory Quantum
computation have been able to so far
so that's a critique of Wheeler to some
extent but more importantly
it is what we know about physical
reality right now
and the fact that this search for ever
deeper understandings of reality never
ends until next time bye-bye
[Music]
foreign